Add blog post about DrainCleaner component (#248)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2021-09-16-drain-cleaner.md

---
layout: post
title: "DrainCleaner: what's this?"
date: 2021-09-16
author: federico_valeri
---

One of the promises of Kubernetes is zero downtime upgrades. If your service is highly available, meaning it has more 
than one replica running on different nodes or availability zones, then it should be possible to do a rolling update 
without any service disruption.

An event that may affect your service availability is the Kubernetes upgrade, where all cluster nodes are drained one by 
one, until they are all running on a new version. Node draining is also used for maintenance. When a node is drained, 
it is cordoned first to prevent scheduling of new Pods and then the old Pods are evicted. This process works well with 
stateless applications, but can cause problems with stateful and replicated applications like Kafka.

<!--more-->

## The node draining problem

A common use case is a producer application sending records to a topic with 3 replicas and with `min.insync.replica=2`,

> which is required to get resiliency against a single node failure. We want such producer to be able to continue 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is required to configured for resiliency against a single node failure. We want such a producer to be able to continue 
```

uninterrupted during a Kubernetes upgrade, where each node is drained right after the previous one has been fully 
evacuated.

The problem is that node draining does not account for the actual internal state of the Kafka cluster, as it works using

> the Readiness state, which indicates if the container is ready to start accepting traffic, but does not necessarily

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `Readiness` state, which indicates if the container is ready to start accepting traffic, but does not necessarily
```

> correspond to the replicas being in-sync. For that reason, there is no guarantee that the next node draining will start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
correspond to the replicas being in sync. For that reason, there is no guarantee that the next node draining will start
```

before the previous evacuated Kafka Pod is fully synced, so you might end up with under-replicated partitions for some

> time, causing the producer's rate drop to zero. This can affects the entire data pipeline, so also consumers will likely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time, causing the producer's rate to drop to zero. This can affect the entire data pipeline, so consumers will also likely
```

be affected.

## Leveraging admission webhooks

> The [DrainCleaner](https://github.com/strimzi/drain-cleaner) is a lightweight application that leverage admission 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [DrainCleaner](https://github.com/strimzi/drain-cleaner) is a lightweight application that leverages admission 
```

> webhooks to help moving Kafka Pods from Kubernetes nodes which are being drained. This is useful if you want the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
webhooks to help move Kafka Pods from Kubernetes nodes which are being drained. This is useful if you want the 
```

> ClusterOperator to move Pods instead of Kubernetes itself. The advantage of this approach is that the ClusterOperator 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cluster Operator to move Pods instead of Kubernetes itself. The advantage of this approach is that the Cluster Operator 
```

makes sure that no partition becomes under-replicated during node draining, by waiting for the synchronization of topics 

> with multiple replicas and `min.insync.replicas < replicas`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with multiple replicas and `min.insync.replicas` < `replicas`.
```

As you can see from the following image, when a new Kubernetes request arrives at the API server endpoint, a 
[ValidatingAdmissionWebhook](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers) 

> controller is invoked after the schema validation phase and it calls every registered webhook, which implement some 
> logic. This can be useful to enforce custom policies or simply be notified about specific events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
controller is invoked after the schema validation phase and it calls every registered webhook to implement some 
logic. This can be useful to enforce custom policies or simply be notified about specific events.
```

![admission controllers](/assets/images/posts/2021-09-16-admission-controllers.png)

> Some admission controllers are actually built-in (i.e. LimitRange, NamespaceLifecycle). ValidatingWebhooks are safe, as 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some admission controllers are actually built-in, such `LimitRange` and `NamespaceLifecycle`. ValidatingWebhooks are safe, as 
```

they cannot change the incoming request and they always see the final version that would be persisted to etcd. 

> > Note: ValidatingWebhooks may be disabled in your Kubernetes cluster for security reasons, so this is the first thing to verify.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: `ValidatingWebhooks` may be disabled in your Kubernetes cluster for security reasons, so this is the first thing to verify.
```

In our case, we want the DrainCleaner to be notified of all Pod eviction requests. The application will then filter out 

> all Pods that are not part of our StatefulSet. One important note is that Kafka CR must have `maxUnavailable: 0` in 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all Pods that are not part of our StatefulSet. One important note is that the Kafka custom resource must have `maxUnavailable: 0` in 
```

> Kafka and Zookeeper [PodDisruptionBudgets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/Pods/disruptions/). This is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kafka and ZooKeeper [PodDisruptionBudgets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/Pods/disruptions/). This is 
```

> required to block Pod draining and let the combined work of DrainCleaner and ClusterOperator to handle this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
required to block Pod draining and let the combined work of DrainCleaner and the Cluster Operator handle this.
```

This is how you can apply that configuration with a single patch command (no rolling update is needed):

```sh
kubectl patch kafka $CLUSTER_NAME --type json -p '[
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/spec/zookeeper/template",
    "value": {
      "PodDisruptionBudget": {
        "maxUnavailable": 0
      }
    }
  },
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/spec/kafka/template",
    "value": {
      "PodDisruptionBudget": {
        "maxUnavailable": 0
      }
    }
  },
]'
```

## Validating webhook configuration

To register the DrainCleaner's endpoint at the Kubernetes control-plane level, you need to create a 

> ValidatingWebhookConfiguration resource. This is a simple REST endpoint, exposed under `/drainer` URL path. When an 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` resource. This is a simple REST endpoint, exposed under `/drainer` URL path. When an 
```

incoming API request matches one of the specified operations, groups, versions, resources, and scope for any of defined 
rules, the request is sent to that endpoint.

```yaml
    rules:
      - apiGroups:   [""]
        apiVersions: ["v1"]
        operations:  ["CREATE"]
        resources:   ["Pods/eviction"]
        scope:       "Namespaced"
    clientConfig:
      service:
        namespace: "strimzi-drain-cleaner"
        name: "strimzi-drain-cleaner"
        path: /drainer
        port: 443
      caBundle: $CA_BUNDLE
```

> Here I used a placeholder for the PEM encoded CA bundle, which is required to validate the webhook's certificate. You 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here I used a placeholder for the PEM-encoded CA bundle, which is required to validate the webhook's certificate. You 
```

can use a self-signed CA certificate, but the DrainCleaner's end-entity certificate, signed by that CA, must have a 
common name (CN) that matches the application's service name.

> Let's see how that CA bundle looks like for a self-signed certificate deployed on a test namespace. CertManager or 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see what that CA bundle looks like for a self-signed certificate deployed on a test namespace. CertManager or 
```

> OpenShift can help with this, by automatically generating and injecting the certificates (see GitHub repository).

Reviewer: Is _(see GitHub repository)_ meant to be a link?

Reviewer 2: You should ideally add a link here.

Author: ok

        Subject: C=IT, ST=Rome, O=Test, CN=drain-cleaner-ca.example.com
        X509v3 extensions:
            X509v3 Basic Constraints: critical
                CA:TRUE, pathlen:0

# DrainCleaner's end-entity certificate         
Certificate:
    Signature Algorithm: sha1WithRSAEncryption
        Issuer: C=IT, ST=Rome, O=Test, CN=drain-cleaner-ca.example.com
        Subject: C=IT, ST=Rome, O=Test, CN=drain-cleaner-webhook.example.com
        X509v3 extensions:
            X509v3 Basic Constraints: critical
                CA:FALSE
            X509v3 Key Usage: 
                Digital Signature, Key Encipherment
            X509v3 Extended Key Usage: 
                TLS Web Server Authentication, TLS Web Client Authentication
            X509v3 Subject Alternative Name: 
                DNS:strimzi-drain-cleaner, 
                DNS:strimzi-drain-cleaner.test, 
                DNS:strimzi-drain-cleaner.test.svc, 
                DNS:strimzi-drain-cleaner.test.svc.cluster.local
```

## Let the magic happen

The DrainCleaner must be deployed by a user with permissions to create all required resources, such as ServiceAccount, 

> ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding. A single instance is handling all Kafka instances hosted on that Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding. A single instance handles all Kafka instances hosted on that Kubernetes cluster.
```

With the ValidatingWebhookConfiguration in place, the DrainCleaner is notified as soon as something tries to evict Kafka 
or ZooKeeper Pods and it annotates them with `strimzi.io/manual-rolling-update`. This tells the ClusterOperator that 
they need to be restarted in the next reconciliation phase, making sure the Kafka cluster is always available. Restart 
annotation is not created if already present (idempotency) or the eviction request is running in dry-run mode. Pod 
restart will be delayed if that would cause one or more partitions to be under-replicated. 

> > Note: The rolling update annotation is supported since Strimzi 0.21.0 release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: The rolling update annotation is supported since the Strimzi 0.21.0 release.
```

> Once you have a Kafka cluster and the DrainCleaner up and running, you can test it by draining one node hosting Kafka 
> and/or Zookeeper Pods with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have a Kafka cluster and the DrainCleaner up and running, you can test it by draining one node hosting the Kafka, Zookeeper, or both Pods with the following command:
```

```sh
kubectl drain $NODE_NAME --delete-emptydir-data --ignore-daemonsets --timeout=6000s --force
```

Looking at the DrainCleaner's logs, you will see the eviction events being notified for all Pods on that node. Only 

> Kafka and Zookeeper Pods are actually annotated for restart, all the rest is filtered out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kafka and Zookeeper Pods are actually annotated for restart. All the rest are filtered out.
```

2021-08-03 08:07:01,508 INFO  [io.str.ValidatingWebhook] (executor-thread-17) Received eviction webhook for Pod my-cluster-kafka-0 in namespace test
2021-08-03 08:07:01,508 INFO  [io.str.ValidatingWebhook] (executor-thread-17) Pod my-cluster-kafka-0 in namespace test will be annotated for restart
2021-08-03 08:07:01,540 INFO  [io.str.ValidatingWebhook] (executor-thread-17) Pod my-cluster-kafka-0 in namespace test found and annotated for restart
```

Given that the node being evacuated is cordoned (unschedulable), Pods restart will actually move them away from that node.

```
2021-08-03 08:07:13 INFO  PodOperator:68 - Reconciliation #13(timer) Kafka(test/my-cluster): Rolling Pod my-cluster-zookeeper-2
2021-08-03 08:08:06 INFO  PodOperator:68 - Reconciliation #13(timer) Kafka(test/my-cluster): Rolling Pod my-cluster-kafka-0
2021-08-03 08:08:53 INFO  AbstractOperator:500 - Reconciliation #13(timer) Kafka(test/my-cluster): reconciled
```

In case you were just trying it out and not doing a real node upgrade, don't forget to uncordon it:

```sh
kubectl uncordon $NODE_NAME
```

## Conclusion

> The DrainCleaner is a lightweight application that runs as a singleton service on your Kubernetes cluster. With a small 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DrainCleaner is a lightweight application that runs as a single service on your Kubernetes cluster. With a small 
```

[ValidatingAdmissionWebhook](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers) 
controller is invoked after the schema validation phase and it calls every registered webhook, to implement some 
logic. This can be useful to enforce custom policies or simply be notified about specific events.

![admission controllers](/assets/images/posts/2021-09-16-admission-controllers.png)

Some admission controllers are actually built-in (i.e. LimitRange, NamespaceLifecycle). ValidatingWebhooks are safe, as 
they cannot change the incoming request and they always see the final version that would be persisted to etcd. 

> Note: ValidatingWebhooks may be disabled in your Kubernetes cluster for security reasons, so this is the first thing to verify.

In our case, we want the DrainCleaner to be notified of all Pod eviction requests. The application will then filter out 
all Pods that are not part of our StatefulSet. One important note is that the `Kafka` custom resource must have 
`maxUnavailable: 0` in Kafka and ZooKeeper [PodDisruptionBudgets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/Pods/disruptions/). 

> This is required to block Pod draining and let the combined work of DrainCleaner and the ClusterOperator handle this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is required to block automatic Pod draining and let the combined work of Drain Cleaner and the Cluster Operator handle this.
```

This is how you can apply that configuration with a single patch command (no rolling update is needed):

```sh

> kubectl patch kafka $CLUSTER_NAME --type json -p '[

Reviewer 2: You should use something like `<CLUSTER-NAME>` instead of `$CLUSTER_NAME` to make it more clear this needs to be replaced.

  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/spec/zookeeper/template",
    "value": {
      "PodDisruptionBudget": {
        "maxUnavailable": 0
      }
    }
  },
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/spec/kafka/template",
    "value": {
      "PodDisruptionBudget": {
        "maxUnavailable": 0
      }
    }
  },
]'

> ```

Author: OK, I'll fix this as I see the value in the declarative approach.

## Validating webhook configuration

> To register the DrainCleaner's endpoint at the Kubernetes control-plane level, you need to create a 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To register the Drain Cleaner's endpoint at the Kubernetes control-plane level, you need to create a 
```

ValidatingWebhookConfiguration resource. This is a simple REST endpoint, exposed under the `/drainer` URL path. When an 
incoming API request matches one of the specified operations, groups, versions, resources, and scope for any of defined 
rules, the request is sent to that endpoint.

```yaml
    rules:
      - apiGroups:   [""]
        apiVersions: ["v1"]
        operations:  ["CREATE"]
        resources:   ["Pods/eviction"]
        scope:       "Namespaced"
    clientConfig:
      service:
        namespace: "strimzi-drain-cleaner"
        name: "strimzi-drain-cleaner"
        path: /drainer
        port: 443
      caBundle: $CA_BUNDLE
```

Here I used a placeholder for the PEM-encoded CA bundle, which is required to validate the webhook's certificate. You 

> can use a self-signed CA certificate, but the DrainCleaner's end-entity certificate, signed by that CA, must have a 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can use a self-signed CA certificate, but the Drain Cleaner's end-entity certificate, signed by that CA, must have a 
```

```sh
# Self-signed CA certificate  
Certificate:
    Signature Algorithm: sha256WithRSAEncryption
        Issuer: C=IT, ST=Rome, O=Test, CN=drain-cleaner-ca.example.com
        Subject: C=IT, ST=Rome, O=Test, CN=drain-cleaner-ca.example.com
        X509v3 extensions:
            X509v3 Basic Constraints: critical
                CA:TRUE, pathlen:0

# DrainCleaner's end-entity certificate         
Certificate:
    Signature Algorithm: sha1WithRSAEncryption
        Issuer: C=IT, ST=Rome, O=Test, CN=drain-cleaner-ca.example.com
        Subject: C=IT, ST=Rome, O=Test, CN=drain-cleaner-webhook.example.com
        X509v3 extensions:
            X509v3 Basic Constraints: critical
                CA:FALSE
            X509v3 Key Usage: 
                Digital Signature, Key Encipherment
            X509v3 Extended Key Usage: 
                TLS Web Server Authentication, TLS Web Client Authentication
            X509v3 Subject Alternative Name: 
                DNS:strimzi-drain-cleaner, 
                DNS:strimzi-drain-cleaner.test, 
                DNS:strimzi-drain-cleaner.test.svc, 
                DNS:strimzi-drain-cleaner.test.svc.cluster.local
```

## Let the magic happen

> The DrainCleaner must be deployed by a user with permissions to create all required resources, such as ServiceAccount, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Drain Cleaner must be deployed by a user with permissions to create all required resources, such as ServiceAccount, 
```

> ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding. A single DrainCleaner instance handles all Kafka instances hosted on that Kubernetes 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding. A single Drain Cleaner instance handles all Kafka instances hosted on that Kubernetes 
```

cluster.

> With the ValidatingWebhookConfiguration in place, the DrainCleaner is notified as soon as something tries to evict Kafka 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the ValidatingWebhookConfiguration in place, the Drain Cleaner is notified as soon as something tries to evict Kafka 
```

> or ZooKeeper Pods and it annotates them with `strimzi.io/manual-rolling-update`. This tells the ClusterOperator that 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or ZooKeeper Pods and it annotates them with `strimzi.io/manual-rolling-update`. This tells the Cluster Operator that 
```

they need to be restarted in the next reconciliation phase, making sure the Kafka cluster is always available. Restart 
annotation is not created if already present (idempotency) or the eviction request is running in dry-run mode. Pod 
restart will be delayed if that would cause one or more partitions to be under-replicated. 

> Note: The rolling update annotation is supported since the Strimzi 0.21.0 release.

> Once you have a Kafka cluster and the DrainCleaner up and running, you can test it by draining the node hosting the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have a Kafka cluster and the Drain Cleaner up and running, you can test it by draining the node hosting the 
```

Kafka Pod, Zookeeper Pod, or both Pods with the following command:

```sh

> kubectl drain $NODE_NAME --delete-emptydir-data --ignore-daemonsets --timeout=6000s --force

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kubectl drain <NODE_NAME> --delete-emptydir-data --ignore-daemonsets --timeout=6000s --force
```

```

> Looking at the DrainCleaner's logs, you will see the eviction events being notified for all Pods on that node. Only 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Looking at the Drain Cleaner's logs, you will see the eviction events being notified for all Pods on that node. Only 
```

2021-08-03 08:07:01,508 INFO  [io.str.ValidatingWebhook] (executor-thread-17) Received eviction webhook for Pod my-cluster-kafka-0 in namespace test
2021-08-03 08:07:01,508 INFO  [io.str.ValidatingWebhook] (executor-thread-17) Pod my-cluster-kafka-0 in namespace test will be annotated for restart
2021-08-03 08:07:01,540 INFO  [io.str.ValidatingWebhook] (executor-thread-17) Pod my-cluster-kafka-0 in namespace test found and annotated for restart
```

Given that the node being evacuated is cordoned (unschedulable), Pods restart will actually move them away from that node.

```
2021-08-03 08:07:13 INFO  PodOperator:68 - Reconciliation #13(timer) Kafka(test/my-cluster): Rolling Pod my-cluster-zookeeper-2
2021-08-03 08:08:06 INFO  PodOperator:68 - Reconciliation #13(timer) Kafka(test/my-cluster): Rolling Pod my-cluster-kafka-0
2021-08-03 08:08:53 INFO  AbstractOperator:500 - Reconciliation #13(timer) Kafka(test/my-cluster): reconciled
```

In case you were just trying it out and not doing a real node upgrade, don't forget to uncordon it:

```sh

> kubectl uncordon $NODE_NAME

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kubectl uncordon <NODE_NAME>
```

```

## Conclusion

> The DrainCleaner is a lightweight application that runs as a single service on your Kubernetes cluster. With a small 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Drain Cleaner is a lightweight application that runs as a single service on your Kubernetes cluster. With a small 
```
